---
layout: post
title:  "The LLM lab empires strike back"
date:   2026-04-27
categories: jekyll update
---
Big news this last week was the deal between Space/X (essentially X.ai) with Cursor. $60bn acquisition or $10bn breakup fee. It is predicated on Cursor's need for cost-effective access to compute to be able to train its own models to reduce its dependence on anthropic and openai and boost its margins. Anthropic and OpenAI are now both clearly major competitors, with arguably greater mindshare and momentum than Cursor, as well as being suppliers. So Cursor had to do something to shift the narative, as even the fund raise it was on wasnt going to magically change the financial or competitive picture. Ive predicted in the past that the startups were going to find it difficult to compete against the big labs, because moving up stack is the way they attract sticky enterprise revenue, and we now see that game playing out.
In parallel cognition(+windsurf) looking for new funding. Essentially the same dynamic as Cursor. And we see Github changing its pricing models to try to improve profitability, as they have the same dynamic as Cursor and Cognition.. ie their COGS are increasing while their revenue has been seat based. I think we are going to see all the folks who supply AI applications and services on top of the models from the frontier labs struggling in the same way, which will lead them have to change their pricing models or move to more use of open models that they self-host.

The open models scene is interesting as while we've seen the open competitors getting close to frontier model performance, they are still a step behind. The latest deepseek release isnt at the leading edge, by the producers own admission, neither are the gemma releases from google etc. and in many cases the frontier capabilities make all the difference when it comes to agentic capabilities. While that may level off at some point and the models may become somewhat commoditized, that hasnt happened yet. So as the labs use their models to build applications in competition with customers, its going to be interesting to see if Anthropic, OpenAI and Google/Deepmind become the equivalent of aws, azure and gcp in the cloud business. Ie the 800 pound gorillas with a few lower cost, lower capbility pilot fish around them, but essentially capturing the majority of the market, revenue and margin.

Time will tell, but it certainly feels like thats the path we are on. This tends to be the way technology evolves. We all actually prefer a small number of competitors we can choose from, but not too many. Consolidation makes life easier for implementers. Some open choices are good too, but in this sort of space rarely dominate. More to come, no doubt. And this week we get the Musk / OpenAI law suit theater to entertain us!
{% include comments.html %}
