---
layout: post
title:  "Move (too) fast?. Oops."
date:   2026-04-06
categories: jekyll update
---
Big news from this last week was the source code leak of Claude Code. Along with the previous leak of some marketing plans that were accessible on a public server, it seems like Anthropic is in "Move fast and Break things" mode. Which would be fine if their mantra wasnt all about Safety? No doubt they'll be revisiting their speed vs safety tradeoffs for a while.

In other news Cursor released Cursor 3, a version more tuned for use with agents and OpenAI produced a Codex plugin for Claude Code to allow Codex to be used to do code reviews of code generated by Claude. Which is something folks have been doing manually for a while. The coopetition is interesting. OpenAI and Anthropic are clearly both doubling down on the software development use case. And so it will be interesting to see how folks like cursor survive. Pivots are needed i think.

The other trend is for compute scarcity to be a real issue. It seems to behind Anthropic cutting off openclaw users from the claude code subscription. That has moved folks to openai's llms but im guessing both companies are going to have to carefully manage their compute resources for a while until more comes online. The scarcity was also likely the key driver behind openai shutting down Sora. Or at least the inability to appropriately monetize the compute. With both companies on the path for IPO we may start to see more focus on these type of issues as they try to show a path toward profitability.

{% include comments.html %}
